docs/1.guide/2.handler.md, before:

---
icon: i-fluent:target-24-regular
---

# Fetch handler

Request handler is defined via `fetch` key since it is similar to [fetch][fetch] API. The input is a [Request][Request] object and handler should return a [Response][Response] or a promise if the server handler is async.

**Example:**

```js
import { serve } from "srvx";

serve({
  async fetch(request) {
    return new Response(
      `
        <h1>👋 Hello there</h1>
        <p>You are visiting ${request.url} from ${request.remoteAddress}</p>
      `,
      { headers: { "Content-Type": "text/html" } },
    );
  },
});
```

## Additional properties

> srvx **never** patches, overrides or extends globals such as [Request][Request] and [Response][Response]. Only few lazy getters prefixed with `x` will optionally be added to the `request` object instance to allow server adoption of [Request][Request].

> [!TIP]
> You can use `ServerRequest` type for TypeScript usage.

### `request.remoteAddress?`

Using `request.remoteAddress` allows to access connected client's ipv4/ipv6 address or hostname.

```js
import { serve } from "srvx";

serve({
  fetch: (request) =>
    new Response(`Your ip address is "${request.remoteAddress}"`),
});
```

### `request.bun?`

Using `request.bun?.server` you can access to the underlying Bun server.

### `request.deno?`

Using `request.deno?.server` you can access to the underlying Deno server.

Using `request.deno?.info` you can access to the extra request information provided by Deno.

### `request.node?`

[Node.js][Node.js] is supported through a proxy that wraps [node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage] as [Request][Request] and converting final state of [node:ServerResponse][ServerResponse] to [Response][Response].

If access to the underlying [Node.js][Node.js] request and response objects is required (only in Node.js runtime), you can access them via `request.node?.req` ([node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage]) and `request.node?.res` ([node:ServerResponse][ServerResponse]).

```js
import { serve } from "srvx";

serve({
  fetch: (request) => {
    if (request.node) {
      console.log("Node.js req path:", request.node?.req.path);
      req.node.res.statusCode = 418; // I'm a teapot!
    }
    return new Response("ok");
  },
});
```

> [!TIP]
> srvx implementation of [Request][Request] proxy directly uses the underlying [node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage] as source of trust. Any changes to [Request][Request] will be reflected to the underlying [node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage] and vise-versa.

:read-more{to="/guide/node" title="Node.js support"}

[Deno]: https://deno.com/
[Bun]: https://bun.sh/
[Node.js]: https://nodejs.org/
[fetch]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API
[Request]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Request
[Response]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response
[IncomingMessage]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_incomingmessage
[ServerResponse]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_serverresponse

Commit message:

refactor!: move extended request context under `request.x.*` (#50)

docs/1.guide/2.handler.md, after:

---
icon: i-fluent:target-24-regular
---

# Fetch handler

Request handler is defined via `fetch` key since it is similar to [fetch][fetch] API. The input is a [Request][Request] object and handler should return a [Response][Response] or a promise if the server handler is async.

**Example:**

```js
import { serve } from "srvx";
serve({
  async fetch(request) {
    return new Response(
      `
        <h1>👋 Hello there</h1>
        <p>You are visiting ${request.url} from ${request.x?.ip}</p>
      `,
      { headers: { "Content-Type": "text/html" } },
    );
  },
});
```

> [!TIP]
> You can use `ServerRequest` type export from `srvx` as type of `request`.

## Extended request context

### `request.x?.ip?`

Using `request.ip` allows to access connected client's ipv4/ipv6 address or hostname.

```js
import { serve } from "srvx";

serve({
  fetch: (request) => new Response(`Your ip address is "${request.x?.ip}"`),
});
```

### `request.x?.runtime?`

Runtime name. Can be `"bun"`, `"deno"`, `"node"`, `"cloudflare"` or any other string.

### `request.x?.bun?`

Using `request.bun?.server` you can access to the underlying Bun server.

### `request.x?.deno?`

Using `request.deno?.server` you can access to the underlying Deno server.

Using `request.deno?.info` you can access to the extra request information provided by Deno.

### `request.x?.node?`

[Node.js][Node.js] is supported through a proxy that wraps [node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage] as [Request][Request] and converting final state of [node:ServerResponse][ServerResponse] to [Response][Response].

If access to the underlying [Node.js][Node.js] request and response objects is required (only in Node.js runtime), you can access them via `request.x?.node?.req` ([node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage]) and `request.x?.node?.res` ([node:ServerResponse][ServerResponse]).

```js
import { serve } from "srvx";

serve({
  fetch: (request) => {
    if (request.node) {
      console.log("Node.js req path:", request.node?.req.path);
      req.node.res.statusCode = 418; // I'm a teapot!
    }
    return new Response("ok");
  },
});
```

> [!TIP]
> srvx implementation of [Request][Request] proxy directly uses the underlying [node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage] as source of trust. Any changes to [Request][Request] will be reflected to the underlying [node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage] and vise-versa.

:read-more{to="/guide/node" title="Node.js support"}

[Deno]: https://deno.com/
[Bun]: https://bun.sh/
[Node.js]: https://nodejs.org/
[fetch]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API
[Request]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Request
[Response]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response
[IncomingMessage]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_incomingmessage
[ServerResponse]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_serverresponse
