---
icon: akar-icons:node-fill
---

# Node.js support

> [!NOTE]
> This is an advanced section, explaining internal mechanism of srvx for Node.js support.

As explained in the [why srvx](/guide/why) section, [Node.js][Node.js] uses different API for handling incoming http requests and sending responses.

srvx internally uses a lightweight proxy system that wraps [node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage] as [Request][Request] and converts the final state of [node:ServerResponse][ServerResponse] to a [Response][Response] object.

## How Node.js compatibility works

For each incoming request, instead of _fully cloning_ [Node.js][Node.js] request object with into a new [Request][Request] instance, srvx creates a proxy that _translates_ all property access and method calls between two interfaces.

With this method, we add **minimum amount of overhead** and can **optimize** internal implementation to leverage most of the possibilities with [Node.js][Node.js] native primitives. This method also has the advantage that there is **only one source of trust** ([Node.js][Node.js] request instance) and any changes to each interface will reflect the other ([node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage] <> [Request][Request]), **maximizing compatibility**. srvx will **never patch of modify** the global [Request][Request] and [Response][Response] constructors, keeping runtime natives untouched.

Internally, the fetch wrapper looks like this:

```ts
function nodeHandler(nodeReq: IncomingMessage, nodeRes: ServerResponse) {
  const request = new NodeRequestProxy(nodeReq);
  const response = await server.fetch(request);
  await sendNodeResponse(nodeRes, response);
}
```

... `NodeRequestProxy`, wraps [node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage] as a standard [Request][Request] interface. <br>
... On first `request.body` access, it starts reading request body as a [ReadableStream][ReadableStream]. <br>
... `request.headers` is a proxy (`NodeReqHeadersProxy`) around `nodeReq.headers` providing a standard [Headers][Headers] interface. <br>
... When accessing `request.url` getter, it creates a full URL string (including protocol, hostname and path) from `nodeReq.url` and `nodeReq.headers` (host). <br>
... Other request APIs are also implemented similarly.

`sendNodeResponse`, handles the [Response][Response] object returned from server fetch method.

... `status`, `statusText`, and `headers` will be set. <br>
... `set-cookie` header will be properly split (with [cookie-es](https://cookie-es.unjs.io)). <br>
... If response has body, it will be streamed to node response. <br>
... The promise will be resolved after the response is sent and callback called by Node.js. <br>

## Fast response

When initializing a new [Response][Response] in Node.js, a lot of extra internals have to be initialized including a [ReadableStream][ReadableStream] object for `response.body` and [Headers][Headers] for `response.headers` which adds significant overhead since Node.js response handling does not need them.

Until there will be native [Response][Response] handling support in Node.js http module, srvx provides a faster alternative `Response` class. You can use this instead to replace `Response` and improve performance.

```js
import { serve } from "srvx";
import { Response } from "srvx/node";

const server = serve({
  port: 3000,
  fetch() {
    return new Response("Hello!");
  },
});

await server.ready();

console.log(`Server running at ${server.url}`);
```

You can locally run benchmarks by cloning [srvx repository](https://github.com/h3js/srvx) and running `npm run bench:node [--all]` script. Speedup in v22.8.0 was roughly **%94**!

## Reverse compatibility

srvx converts a [fetch][fetch]-like [Request][Request] => [Response][Response] handler to [node:IncomingMessage][IncomingMessage] => [node:ServerResponse][ServerResponse] handler that is compatible **with** Node.js runtime.

If you want to instead convert a Node.js server handler (like [Express][Express]) with `(req, IncomingMessage, res: ServerResponse)` signature to [fetch][fetch]-like handler ([Request][Request] => [Response][Response]) that can work **without** Node.js runtime you can instead use [unjs/unenv](https://unenv.unjs.io) Node.js compatibility layer to emulate Node.js API.

```js
// unenv does not have any Node.js dependency
import { createFetch, createCall } from "unenv/runtime/fetch/index";
const nodeHandler = async (
  req /* IncomingMessage */,
  res /* ServerResponse */,
) => {
  res.end(JSON.stringify({ "req.url": req.url, "req.headers": req.headers }));
};
const serverFetch = createFetch(createCall(nodeHandler));
const res = await serverFetch("/test", { headers: { foo: "bar" } });
console.log(res);
```

[Node.js]: https://nodejs.org/
[fetch]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API
[Request]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Request
[Response]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response
[Headers]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Headers
[ReadableStream]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream
[IncomingMessage]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_incomingmessage
[ServerResponse]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_serverresponse
[Express]: https://expressjs.com/
